What matters to them the most?

Getting HR insights from your team

Your team will require a few different skills to optimise the impact and frequency of workforce insights. To start You may be able to partner an experienced HR business partner with someone who can source and analyse data to question and shape relevant insights. This can be effective as you can quickly identify what is important, build a business case for additional resourcing either time or technology and start off with a quick win that will allow you to spend additional time with key stakeholders.

At some point you may reach a bottle neck where you have squeezed the sponge dry and it may be difficult to find new insights or more commonly, your analyst and team get stuck into regular reporting around what has previously worked, only to find that the reports are not adding any insight or they do not go deep enough to shed light onto real issues.

Here are my top three tips to building a Great analytics functions that should start to show value incrememtally.

1. Stop the dashboards with typical HR metrics. Time and time again I see dashboards or monthly reports being sent with measures like attrition rates by line of business or recruitment metrics like time to fill. The former will usually not have enough detail to identify if it is good or bad or more importantly hide key information about the type of turnover creating future organisation issues. The latter focuses on the recruitment teams efficiency That could have a negative impact to the quality of the hire impacting new starter retention and potentially lowering productivity Impacting revenue or creating higher risk / lowering brand reputation.

Worst case, you create disengagement and a loss of interest to use data to help inform some of the most important decisions an organisation makes; its staff.

Most HR reporting outputs fall into two categories; reporting or insights to action. You should have the reporting aspect automated and centralised to ensure standard definitions and understanding and within this you should know who your customers are and measure demand. On the other side, an insight is usually temporary and available for a finite period of time either until the organisations misses many opportunities and gets taken over or they do not survive. The best way to start creating insights is by working on specific business problems through sprint programs lasting between 4-6 weeks. These should be sponsored by an executive and involve a technical lead, engagement manager and someone from the business.

2. Start talking with the business to identify top organisational priorities and risks. Key priorities could be raising revenue, decreasing operational cost, retention of top talent and building key future capabilities with new products or operating model. These priorities then need to be broken down further I.e. How much of this can be controlled internally? What proportion of this relates to workforce? With this information, you can then start to understand key segments and where this relates to in he employment life cycle.

If you would like to start thinking about key HR metrics in a different way then I suggest that you take a look at this metric dictionary by Visie.

3. Behavioural based analysis. This may sound difficult to do but it can be very easy. This is about segmenting key workforce metrics against segments that best identify groups of employees. The data that you have available should include information on the types of positions, this needs to be taken up a level to identify role and talent segments. Supply and demand for particular roles have varied widely in the past 10 years, we have seen a higher demand for engineers and now a higher demand for technology professionals. Grouping by role where statistically significant can help to shed light on retention, productivity and leadership issues and help to develop a strategy to improve.

Additional thoughts

Analytics and insights are a very personal thing and need to be customised for each organisation. You will be dealing with many data sources, information will not be properly structured and there will be data integrity issues and managers will have different interpretations of what should work for them. There is no right answer which is why executive level buy in is most crucial for the softer elements of data insights. The technology aspect is fairly straight forward, there is no one tool for the job and there is no one company that has the silver bullet. In my next post, I will provide some guidance on technology, some of it free that will help boost productivity and give a competitive edge when compared to others in the board room and externally.

